I wanna emphasize there is
some more power in this,
I was focusing a lot on
the lack of work you do.
But the way we work, we actually do
cleanup, is the best way I can explain it,
and this ensures that only
the current dependencies are tracked.
And this is something that you actually
can't do with the compiler, and
this is why we rely on a runtime
reactive system with Solid.
I think it's just easier to show than
really explain this, so I'm gonna open up,
yet again, one more example and
kind of walk through this a little bit.
Cuz we're still playing with
our first name and last name.
And this time, I've added one more signal,
where we wanna toggle
between showing the first name or
showing the full name, right?
And what I've done is I've
kind of changed our memo now,
so that if you're not showing
the full name, return the first name.
And otherwise,
do the full thing like we're doing before.
And again, we've got our effect,
which now does our display name.
And what I wanna show here is that,
when we create,
it's kind of the same as before.
We're just gonna log our John Smith here.
Similarly, when we set
show full name to false,
we're just gonna see John,
cuz this is gonna rerun again.
It's gonna realize that it's false and
return the first name.
But where things get interesting is,
what happens if you change the last name?
Well, you're only showing the first name.
And for this, actually, you know what,
I'm gonna just put an extra log in here,
just so
that we can actually see what's going on.
We'll call this one
"Create/Update displayName".
So let's look at this again,
Create, Create/Update dsplayName.
My name is John Smith,
set the full name to false.
We obviously have to update the display
name and set the name to John.
But now, look, when we change
the last name, nothing runs.
And the reason for this is,
the last time that this displayName ran,
it only listened to first name, it did
not listen to first name and last name.
So the runtime reactivity
is smart enough to
know that it's not listening to last name.
And you might be like,
does this mean things can get out of sync?
It doesn't though, because it's only
possible for this to rerun again
if this condition around the showFullNName
actually changes, or first name changes.
And the first name changes, we don't care,
we're just gonna run this again and
it's gonna shortcut to here and
show the first name again.
However, if I set it to full name again,
it's gonna rerun the function,
at which point it's gonna grab
the latest value anyways.
And we can see that it did, in fact,
change it to legend behind the scene here.
And at that point, it reruns
the function and updates the legend.
This is an important
behavior to understand,
because if there is a decision point in
your code, it has to be also reactive.
Because if we just went in here and
didn't use a signal to
make the switch,
it's never going to retrigger to go.
So if I just made showFullName or
something like,
if I just made it something like,
I don't know,
let showFullName = true initially,
I think.
And then I get rid of this function, and
then instead of calling a signal,
I just was like, let's do something here.
showFullName = false, showFullName = true.
What you're gonna see is that,
It's not gonna be smart enough,
to be able to determine what has changed.
Essentially, when I go set full
name to false, nothing happens.
Change name, it actually still
tracking the full name, so
it actually reruns again.
At that point, it realizes that it
only needs to show the first name,
and then when I set it to false,
[LAUGH] then it actually is still
only showing the first name.
So I just wanna bring this up front cuz
this is one of those kinda like you
have to be aware of things.
It's incredibly powerful because
it optimizes your code flow, but
it means that you are entering a world
in which things are signals and
things are reactivity.
Reactivity is something
you can lose essentially.
So this is why this is a key concept.
>> The biggest thing is that
all has to be a function call-
>> Yeah,
>> Of signal or whatever in order for
the dependency tracking to be correct.
>> Yeah, it's gonna be one and
the other primitives everything's kind of
derived from this basic language.
You can build that up as much as you want,
but at its core, we have these signals and
we have these tracking
things like effects.
And basically for anything to change,
it has to be within that system.
Reactive libraries were actually
kind of popular in the early 2010s.
And they almost died out
immediately with the dawn of React.
So I wanna point out
this isn't a new idea.
And this is why I'm kinda talking a bit
about the trade-offs to understanding
that, cuz I think it's important.
One of the biggest reasons so,
is that the early reactive libraries
lack predictable execution.
You might in your head
already kind of be picturing,
what if I have a whole bunch of stuff that
depends on a whole bunch of other stuff.
And then I'm ping-ponging it around and
making dependencies or
write other dependencies and
making a huge mess.
And I think this is a fair consideration.
It's why with all JS, for example,
we're very careful about
things like two way binding.
We've learned a lot from React in terms
of things like unidirectional flow and
immutability.
Because adding structure on top
is actually fairly important,
cuz with this amount of power,
things can go pretty crazy.
But the second and really key safeguard
here is that React systems like SOLID or
MobX actually look at
your graph at runtime and
topologically sort the dependencies
in such a way that they can
guarantee that on any change,
every function only runs once.
And for that reason,
you don't have to worry,
unless you're doing stuff purposely,
maybe not purposely, but
trying to push stuff around in
a kind of very chaotic manner.
You can depend on stuff
executing in a certain order.
So that has changed from the early days,
and
I think that's kind of important
to kinda point out at this point.
We'll be covering this a bit later on, but
there is actual some APIs here
that are more advanced to kind of
handle these kinda situations
to avoid things like untrack.
The ability to say, hey, I don't want to
listen to these variables under this scope.
It's kind of the inverse of something
like React's dependency arrays.
In React, you have to always
provide the dependency arrays.
Things like untrack are saying,
don't listen to this.
The default is that things
are kind of memorized and
that they automatically update.
This is how you say don't update.
And batch, I'm mentioning here,
it doesn't come too often,
because internally, everything is batched,
and so it all kind of happens at once.
But sometimes when you're integrating with
third party systems, you wanna apply many
changes at the same time instead of
doing them all independently, and
batch gives us a way of doing that.